# Svelte Rust/WASI in Browser Example

This example uses Rust Web Assembly compiled for WASI (the Web Assembly
System Interface) running in the browser using [WasmerJS]("https://github.com/wasmerio/wasmer-js), and uses `wasm-bindgen` to make it easy to pass data from JavaScript to Rust and vice versa.

Rust is compiled for target `wasm32-wasi` and bindings are generated using
`wasm-bindgen` plus a small amount of post-processing to adapt the bindings for
WASI.

For a non-Rust example and Svelte + Wasmer/WASI template see [simple-svelte-wasmer-webpack](https://github.com/happybeing/simple-svelte-wasmer-webpack) which was the starting point for this project.

## Features
- A Svelte WASM/WASI app with Rust subsystem (using target `wasm32-wasi`)
- JavaScript and Rust both accessing the WasmerJS/wasmFS filesystem
- Calling Rust from JavaScript and vice versa using `wasm-bindgen+`
- Passing and returning JavaScript and Rust native types with no mucking about
- Passing and returning JavaScript objects and arrays to/from Rust structs

**Help!** I'd like to add more examples of passing variables using `wasm-bindgen` so if you know how to do something I'm not showing yet please open an issue or PR (see Rust [main.rs](https://github.com/happybeing/svelte-wasi-with-rust/blob/main/src/rust-wasi-example/src/main.rs)).

Note: `wasm-bindgen+` indicates a small amount of post-processing to make the `wasm-bindgen` output suitable for use with WasmerJS in the browser.
# How This Works
Most of the work is done by WasmerJS and `wasm-bindgen` (CLI because `wasm-pack` does not support WASI at this time). It was tricky to work out how to do this, but the solution is straightforward.

The main difficulty is that the JavaScript bindings generated by `wasm-bindgen` import the corresponding `wasm-bindgen` WASM output and this fails because the imports needed by the WASM are not available when the WASI is initialised.

## Modified Build Process
A script (scripts/wbg_to_wasi.js) has been provided which creates a modified version of the JavaScript generated by `wasm-bindgen`. You don't need to invoke the script yourself because it is included in the build commands which handle everything. So the following is just to document how it works.

In the following example the `wasm-bindgen` generated JavaScript is in wasi-example_bg.js, which the script copies to a new file wasi-example_bg_wasi.js with changes. Firstly the import of the WASM file:
```javascript
import * as wasm from './wasi-example_bg.wasm';
```
is replaced by a way to provide the imports after the bindings module has loaded:
```javascript
let wasm;
export function setBindingsWasm(w){ wasm = w; }
```
Secondly, imported JavaScript module names are changed to a relative path (because you can't specify a relative path with the `#[wasm_bindgen]` macro). So a line such as:
```javascript
import { js_test_n } from 'test';
```
is replaced with:
```javascript
import { js_test_n } from './test.js';
```
If necessary you can customise the path by editing the command which invokes the script (see package.json). I suspect there's a better way to handle this second modification - PR's welcome!

## Implemention in the App
Although this repository implements the app using Svelte, it follows the WasmerJS example documentation closely and should be simple to apply in any web framework.

IMPORTANT: your Rust `main()` function must be empty if you want to call Rust functions from JavaScript under Wasmer WASI. As in:
```rust
main(){}
```

To make use of this, your web app does three things (see for example [src/App.svelte](https://github.com/happybeing/svelte-wasi-with-rust/blob/main/src/App.svelte)).

First import the modified bindings as `wasm`:
```javascript
import * as wasm from './wasi-example_bg_wasi.js';
```

Provide modified bindings along with any other imports (in this case a `test` module, 'test.js') when initialising the Web Assembly. Note that you must use the name of the original bindings module './wasi-example_bg.js':
```javascript
imports = {test,...{'./wasi-example_bg.js': await import('./wasi-example_bg_wasi')},...imports};

let instance = await WebAssembly.instantiate(wasmModule, {
	...imports
});
```
Finally, provide the wasm module to the JavaScript bindings immediately after the call to `wasi.start(...)`:
```javascript
wasi.start(instance);
wasm.setBindingsWasm(instance.exports);
```

That's it. From there on you can make calls to WASM via the bindings using the `wasm` import './wasi-example_bg_wasi.js'. For example:
```javascript
wasm.rust_print_bg_n(256);  // Call Rust, print number to stdout
```
# Setup

## Prerequisites
As well as NodeJS and Rust you need the Rust `wasm32-wasi` target:
```bash
rustup target add wasm32-wasi
```
And the `wasm-bindgen` CLI:
```bash
cargo install wasm-bindgen-cli
```
**Note:** make sure `wasm-bindgen --version` matches the version of the `wasm-bingen` module in `Cargo.toml` (/src/rust-wasi-example/Cargo.toml). If the versions don't match after doing `cargo install wasm-bindgen-cli && wasm-bindgen --version`, modify the version referred to in `Cargo.toml` to match the CLI.

You should only need the first and second parts of the version to match, so for example `wasm-bindgen --version` of 'wasm-bindgen 0.2.69' should work fine with Cargo.toml 'wasm-bindgen = "^0.2"').
## Get the Code
If you don't have `yarn` use `npm run` instead of `yarn` in the following:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/happybeing/svelte-wasi-with-rust
cd svelte-wasi-with-rust
yarn && yarn dev-wasm-bindgen && yarn dev
```
Once the development build completes you can visit the app at localhost:8080.

# Builds
## Release
To build for release:
```bash
yarn build
```
To test, use `yarn serve public` and visit `localhost:5000`

To deploy, upload everything in /public
## Development

The App code is in `src/App.svelte` and the Rust subsystem is in `src/rust-wasi-example`.
## Development Builds
In Linux, you can use `inotify` to re-build the app on changes to the Rust subsystem as follows.
In one terminal watch and re-build the app with:
```bash
yarn dev
```
To re-build the wasm you can use either `yarn dev-wasm-bindgen` or if you have installed `inotify` on Linux you can watch and re-build the Rust subsystem with:
```bash
yarn watch-wasm-bindgen
```

If you're using VSCode, we recommend installing the offical Svelte extension as well as the offical Rust extension. If you are using other editors, your may need to install a plugin in order to get syntax highlighting and intellisense for both Svelte and Rust.

